Introduce "split" metric schema transformation (#2653)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification: specification/schemas/file_format_v1.1.0.md

```

#### rename_attributes Transformation

This is similar to the "rename_attributes" transformation supported in "all" and
"resource" sections. In addition it is also possible to optionally specify spans
and events that the transformation should apply to (both optional conditions
must match, if specified, for transformation to be applicable). Here is the
structure:

```yaml
    span_events:
      changes:
        - rename_attributes:
            attribute_map:
              # map of key/values. The keys are the old attribute name used
              # in the previous version, the values are the new attribute name
              # starting from this version.

            apply_to_spans:
              # Optional span names to apply to. If empty applies to all spans.

            apply_to_events:
              # Optional event names to apply to. If empty applies to all events.
```

### metrics Section

"metrics" section in the schema file defines transformations that are applicable
only to Metric data type. It must contain a sub-section named "changes" that
defines a sequence of actions to be applied to convert metrics from the previous
version to this version.

> Two transformations are supported for section "metrics": "rename_metrics" and
> "rename_attributes".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Three transformations are supported for section "metrics": "rename_metrics",
"rename_attributes" and "split".
```

Author: Done.

Here is the structure:

```yaml
    metrics:
      changes:
        - rename_metrics:
            # map of key/values. The keys are the old metric name used
            # in the previous version, the values are the new metric name
            # starting from this version.
```

#### rename_attributes Transformation

This is similar to the "rename_attributes" transformation supported in "span"
sections. Here is the structure:

```yaml
    metrics:
      changes:
        - rename_attributes:
            attribute_map:
              # map of key/values. The keys are the old attribute name used
              # in the previous version, the values are the new attribute name
              # starting from this version.

            apply_to_metrics:
              # Optional. If it is missing the transformation is applied
              # to all metrics. If it is present the transformation is applied
              # only to the metrics with the name that is found in the sequence
              # specified below.
```

#### split Transformation

This transformation splits a metric into several metrics and eliminates an attribute.
Here is the structure:

```yaml
    metrics:
      changes:

>         - split:

Reviewer 2: I'm a bit worried about this operation here.   It seems highly targeted at the exact use case of ONE CL.

If we think about long-term maintenance of these transformation, I think we should consider leveraging something like a stream-time language for altering metrics.

Specifically, something like:

```
metrics:
  changes:
    split:
      apply_to_metric: my.bad.metric
      transformations:
        my.bad.metric.up: 'DROP direction WHERE direction=up'
        my.bad.metric.down: 'DROP direction WHERE directoin=down'
```

It's a bit too late now to really think through metric transformations abstractly (and I know there's been a lot of discussion around this in the collector).  My hope here is that we can stave too many of these ad-hoc single-use-case transformations for something more general, as we're very likely to need it (evidence: Prometheus relabelling + rewrite rules).

Author: > I'm a bit worried about this operation here. It seems highly targeted at the exact use case of ONE CL.

Arguably, it is not one use case. I have seen this transformation earlier internally when looking at different schemas. The particular change here in Otel was the trigger. "split" is one of the transform types I met in the past. A more complete list can be seen here: https://github.com/tigrannajaryan/telemetry-schema/blob/main/schema/testdata/schema-example.yaml
Unsurprisingly there is also a "merge" which is the reverse of "split", plus a few others. I intentionally excluded these from the initial version of Schema Files, since I wanted a stronger evidence that Otel actually needs them.

> If we think about long-term maintenance of these transformation, I think we should consider leveraging something like a stream-time language for altering metrics.

The transformations must be easy to implement efficiently. They also need to be reversible as much as possible (to allow version downgrades). A stream-like language will be very difficult to fit into these requirements. Not impossible, but much harder. So, possible something we can add in the future as another type of transformation when it becomes a necessity.

Reviewer 3: See also #2675.

> The transformations must be easy to implement efficiently. They also need to be reversible as much as possible

This is a good explanation for the use of a dedicated structure, to me.

Author: The spec [touches it here](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/schemas/file_format_v1.0.0.md#order-of-transformations), but we probably need to make it clearer. I have also just filed another related issue https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/2680

            # Name of old metric to split.
            apply_to_metric: 
            # Name of attribute in the old metric to use for splitting. The attribute will be
            # eliminated, the new metric will not have it.
            by_attribute: 
            # Names of new metrics to create, one for each possible value of attribute.

>             attributes_to_metrics:

Reviewer 3: The name "attributes_to_metrics" is somehow backwards because this is a map from metric names to attribute values. I wonder if the name "metrics_from_attributes" would be more explanatory?

Author: Yes, renamed to `metrics_from_attributes`.

        - rename_attributes:
            attribute_map:
              peer.service: peer.service.name
            apply_to_events:
              # Optional event names to apply to. If empty applies to all events.
              - exception.stack_trace

    metrics:
      # Definitions that apply to Metric data type.
      changes:
        - rename_metrics:
            # map of key/values. The keys are the old metric name used
            # in the previous version, the values are the new metric name
            # starting from this version.
            container.cpu.usage.total: cpu.usage.total
            container.memory.usage.max: memory.usage.max

        - rename_attributes:
            attribute_map:
              status: state
            apply_to_metrics:
              # Optional. If it is missing the transformation is applied
              # to all metrics. If it is present the transformation is applied
              # only to the metrics with the name that is found in the sequence
              # specified below.
              - system.cpu.utilization
              - system.memory.usage
              - system.memory.utilization
              - system.paging.usage

>         - split:

Author: >the door is probably closed on doing anything about it.

Yes, unfortunately too late for that. It can be done in Schema File Format 2.x.

            # Example from the change done by https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/2617
            # Name of old metric to split.
            apply_to_metric: system.paging.operations
            # Name of attribute in the old metric to use for splitting. The attribute will be
            # eliminated, the new metric will not have it.
            by_attribute: direction
            # Names of new metrics to create, one for each possible value of attribute.
            attributes_to_metrics:
              # If "direction" attribute equals "in" create a new metric called "system.paging.operations.in".

>               system.paging.operations.in: in

Reviewer: based on the name `attributes_to_metrics` I would expect the order of the configuration here to be reversed

Author: Renamed to `metrics_from_attributes`.

Here is the structure of the Schema File:

```yaml

> # Defines the file format. MUST be set to 1.1.0.

Reviewer 4: Should we retain `file_format_v1.0.0.md` for posterity?  Or should this be `file_format_v1.md` and always represent the latest definition of the `v1` schema?

Author: I was on the fence about this and eventually decide against it just to make the diff easier to understand. I can restore file_format_v1.0.0.md. I think it is a bit better to preserve the history, but will make a bit more difficult to understand what has changed between the versions since github won't show the diff automatically anymore.

  in a backward compatible manner. "Backward compatible" in this context means
  that consumers that are aware of the new MINOR number can consume the file of
  a particular MINOR version number or of any MINOR version number lower than
  that, provided that MAJOR version numbers are the same. This can happen for
  example when:

>   - A new transformation type is added.

Reviewer 4: Do we care about forward compatibility here?  What happens when a schema transform processor that doesn't understand the new transformation type is used with a schema of this version?  Should it refuse to process? Process those transformations it does know about?

Author: This is specifically called out in the spec.

```
there is no "forward compatibility" based on MINOR version number. Consumers which support reading up to a particular MINOR version number SHOULD NOT attempt to consume files with higher MINOR version numbers.
```

So, it means it should refuse to process. The entire schema file should be refused. It should not process just the transformations it knows about since that can be dangerous and result in a wrong state.

              - system.memory.utilization
              - system.paging.usage

        - split:
            # Example from the change done by https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/2617
            # Name of old metric to split.
            apply_to_metric: system.paging.operations
            # Name of attribute in the old metric to use for splitting. The attribute will be
            # eliminated, the new metric will not have it.
            by_attribute: direction
            # Names of new metrics to create, one for each possible value of attribute.
            attributes_to_metrics:
              # If "direction" attribute equals "in" create a new metric called "system.paging.operations.in".

>               in: system.paging.operations.in

Author: Should we reverse the keys and values in this map? It would allow to specify attribute values which are non-primitives (in theory we allow arrays as attribute values).

Author: keys/value reversed now.
